Adding a /vehicles endpoint to show the current status of the fleet (#376)
CityOfLosAngeles/mobility-data-specification: provider/README.md

[Top][toc]

## Realtime Data

> All providers should provide an endpoint that displays the current status of a providers vehicles on the PROW. Only vehicles that are currently in available, unavailable, or reserved states should be returned in this payload. Data in this endpoint should reconcile with data from the status changes enpdoint. This data should be refreshed at most every 5 minutes.

Reviewer: So be a little pedantic, I think "at most" in the context of time can be ambiguous. "at most every 5 minutes" could be interpreted as "no more frequently than once every 5 minutes" rather than the intended interpretation of "at least once every five minutes."

I would suggest instead:

```suggestion
All providers should provide an endpoint that displays the current status of a providers vehicles on the PROW. Only vehicles that are currently in available, unavailable, or reserved states should be returned in this payload. Data in this endpoint should reconcile with data from the status changes endpoint. The data returned by this endpoint should be as close to realtime as possible, but in no case should it be more than 5 minutes out-of-date.
```

Reviewer 2: Updated the language to reflect your suggestion @jfh01

[Top][toc]

## Realtime Data

> All providers should provide an endpoint that displays the current status of a providers vehicles on the PROW. Only vehicles that are currently in an available, unavailable, or reserved states should be returned in this payload. Data in this endpoint should generally reconcile with data from the status changes enpdoint.

Reviewer 3: Total vehicles in PRoW consists of those in states of available, unavailable, reserved, and trip.  Can vehicles in trip be added to this endpoint to ensure accurate counting for the purposes of things like vehicle caps?

Author: For provider reserved covers reserved & trip doesn't it?

> All providers should provide an endpoint that displays the current status of a providers vehicles on the PROW. Only vehicles that are currently in an available, unavailable, or reserved states should be returned in this payload. Data in this endpoint should generally reconcile with data from the status changes enpdoint.

Reviewer 4: In today's MDS call, we talked about marking this /vehicles endpoint as "optional" in 0.4.1 and likely promoting it to "required" in 0.5.0. I'd be curious to see how this could best be expressed in this diff. Right now, this line says "All providers should" provide this endpoint - how should this wording be modified?

Would modifying that portion of the line to read something more like "Providers MAY provide an endpoint that..." be sufficient, or should this documentation also clearly call out the plan to mark this endpoint as required in 0.5.0? I don't have any particular preference re: wording, I just want to make sure that we write this down somewhere so that people who weren't on the call can get the full picture!

Reviewer 2: I think our use of words like MAY/SHOULD and MUST has been fairly consistent and we would continue with that approach here. But you raise a good point that visibility of this changing requirement is important. Maybe it would be useful to add a line to each endpoint description indicating if it is required or not:

```diff
Endpoint: /vehicles
+ Required/Optional: Optional
Method: GET
Schema: vehicles schema
data Payload: { "vehicles": [] }, an array of objects with the following structure
```

Reviewer: As discussed on the 2/13 call, we may want to add a note about the future development path. e.g:

     Required/Optional: Optional (may become required in a future major release)

> ### Vehicles

Reviewer 3: Would it make sense to follow REST-like practice of returning a single vehicles if GET `/vehicles/{device_id}` is called?

Reviewer 2: [Decided not to support REST-like querying for now](https://github.com/openmobilityfoundation/mobility-data-specification/pull/376#issuecomment-575301414)

Field Name          | Required  | Defines
--------------------| ----------| ----------
last_updated        | Yes       | Timestamp indicating the last time the data in this feed was updated
ttl                 | Yes       | Integer representing the number of milliseconds before the data in this feed will be updated again (0 if the data should always be refreshed)

Endpoint: `/vehicles`
Method: `GET`
`data` Payload: `{ "vehicles": [] }`, an array of objects with the following structure

| Field | Type | Required/Optional | Comments |
| ----- | ---- | ----------------- | ----- |
| `provider_id` | UUID | Required | A UUID for the Provider, unique within MDS |
| `provider_name` | String | Required | The public-facing name of the Provider |
| `device_id` | UUID | Required | A unique device ID in UUID format, should match this device in Provider |
| `vehicle_id` | String | Required | The Vehicle Identification Number visible on the vehicle itself, should match this device in provider |
| `vehicle_type` | Enum | Required | see [vehicle types](#vehicle-types) table |
| `propulsion_type` | Enum[] | Required | Array of [propulsion types](#propulsion-types); allows multiple values |

> | `last_event_time` | [timestamp][ts] | Required | Date/time when last status change occurred. See [Event Times](#event-times) |

Reviewer 3: Is `last_event_time` needed if `last_event_location` also contains a required timestamp?

Reviewer 2: Including this field outside of `location` is consistent with how `status_changes` represents the same information.

| `last_event_type` | Enum | Required | Event type of most recent status change. See [event types](#event-types) table |
| `last_event_type_reason` | Enum | Required | Event type reason of most recent status change, allowable values determined by [`event type`](#event-types) |
| `last_event_location` | GeoJSON [Point Feature][geo]| Required | Location of veicle's last event |

> | `current_location` | GeoJSON [Point Feature][geo] | Optional | Current loaction of vehicle if different from last event |

Reviewer 5: I can see this field being used in a few different ways. It could indicate a vehicle is that is moved in a way that's not covered by a status event (eg a passerby moves a vehicle that is blocking the sidewalk). That seems useful. I could also see it being used to update the position of a vehicle that is in a reserved state. That would be very different than what we have today, since it would report realtime events of a vehicle when it is associated to an individual (vs a vehicle unoccupied on the PROW). Are there privacy implications that need to be addressed? An example, perhaps a edge case, of an abuse, would be if person1, with access to this feed, observes person2 in real life starting a trip, then person1 could then track in realtime person2.

> | `current_location` | GeoJSON [Point Feature][geo] | Optional | Current loaction of vehicle if different from last event |

Author: This is a super good point. I think the updating of current location for vehicles that have moved without emitting events seems quite useful, and i agree that updating location during a ride has some privacy implications. I'm going to tweak the language to take a crack at clarifying.

> | `current_location` | GeoJSON [Point Feature][geo] | Required | Current location of vehicle if different from last event, and the vehicle is not currently on a trip |

Reviewer 6: Should this be `Required if Applicable`? Is there value in including this if it is a duplication of the `last_event_location` in many cases?

Reviewer 2: @thekidder [some earlier comments](https://github.com/openmobilityfoundation/mobility-data-specification/pull/376/files/15bad5cbb43abdcc2beb5e6171658a3510e27594#r335158972) were made about the possible distinction here.

Reviewer 6: Sorry, I neglected to follow up on this and that link is now broken. Is that discussion archived anywhere?

Reviewer 2: Made this update in the language and schema

[Top][toc]

## Realtime Data

> All providers should provide an endpoint that displays the current status of a providers vehicles on the PROW. Only vehicles that are currently in an available, unavailable, or reserved states should be returned in this payload. Data in this endpoint should generally reconcile with data from the status changes enpdoint.

Reviewer 7: I feel like there maybe needs to be more definition about how this relates to the status changes endpoint. Specifically, I wonder about how this endpoint deals with lost vehicles:
- If the provider is allowed to omit a vehicle from this endpoint when they no longer believe it's in a knowable location on the PROW, it won't be possible in general to reconcile this data with data from the status changes endpoint, since that endpoint has no way of representing a vehicle going missing.
- If it's mandatory for the data from this endpoint to correlate with the status changes endpoint, the provider will have no way to prune missing vehicles, resulting in a monotonically increasing number of "stuck" vehicles in this endpoint over time.

The former option definitely seems more practical, but it also creates a weird situation where the only way for a consumer to know when a provider considers a vehicle "lost" is to watch the realtime endpoint and see when it disappears. If removing vehicles from the realtime endpoint is permissible, it seems like it might make sense to also add a status change capturing that removal so that the two streams can be reliably correlated with each other.

Author: This is the main issue to be resolved here. There have been long running conversations about how to deal with vehicles that go missing, or leave the PROW without an event. 

I've always advocated for the addition of a `lost` event type reason for `removed` which would make the latter option you suggest feasible. We've gone back and forth on the justification for such a reason, and whether or not this would obfuscate valuable data from consumers.

Reviewer 5: What does it mean for a reserved state to be returned in this payload? Does that mean the endpoint is returning the location where a reserved event occurred or is that the realtime location of the vehicle while it is in a trip? If the latter, I'm wondering if there needs to be some language about time resolution for two reasons: this is a moving vehicle and there may be some privacy considerations. That is, this would be realtime data of a person in a trip as opposed to a static vehicle on the street not associated with an individual.

Reviewer 8: I think `removed`/`lost` should be either `inactive`/`lost` or `missing`/`lost`.  My interpretation of `removed` is "not in the public right of way because the provider has it".  `lost` is pretty clearly "the provider doesn't have it", and it _may or may not_ be in the public right of way.

Reviewer 2: On the 2/13 call we decided to punt `removed`/`lost` to the Agency/Provider alignment work in #271 slated for the next major MDS release.
